---
layout: post
title: "Bitcoin: USD Value"
date: 2017-09-25 08:50
comments: true
published: true
categories:
---

In [part 1](/blog/2017/09/22/bitcoin-value/) I explained
how money has always been a global ledger and Bitcoin is just a
different implementation of one. The million dollar question remains,
what should Bitcoin be worth in a currency we're more familiar with,
such as USD?

### Asset Pricing ###

To illustrate the dilemma we're faced with, lets look at three types
of assets and how we price them.

_Stocks:_ price is determined by the present and future profits, which
is relatively straight forward.

_Commodities_ (e.g oil): price is a function of supply (oil being
produced) and demand (oil burned in engines or whatever).

_Store of value:_ this is anything that is bought because it keeps its
value. Most commonly it is precious metals like gold, but it can also
be fiat currency or valuable works of art. This category is most
fitting for Bitcoin. Pricing of a store of value is strangely
arbitrary, I attempt to explain it below.

### Speculative Demand ###

There are two kinds of demand. _Actual_ demand is based in our
everyday needs. For example we rely on combustible engines which
consume oil. Engines burn oil (or its byproducts) converting it to
exhaust gases, at which point it is no more. The more we drive, the
more oil we burn, the higher the demand.

The second kind of demand is _speculative_. It is based on the
expectation of a future price change. Speculators buy assets they
expect to go up in price and sell those they don't. When everyone
wants to buy oil because they think the price is going up, its price
does indeed goes up. But that is not directly related to the actual
supply of oil from the ground (it often is, but not always).

### Right Price ###

In [part 1](/blog/2017/09/22/bitcoin-value/) we covered how
a sale is actually a loan, and how the seller ends up with tokens
representing the value owed to the seller. The number of tokes (aka
price) is a reflection of how we value things relative to each other.

When we buy stuff for everyday use we establish a price range that is
driven by, for lack of a better term, _common sense_. For example we
may think that a loaf of bread is worth a dozen eggs. If the price of
something exceeds common sense, we will forego buying it. This means
that the price has a direct effect on demand especially when it comes
to everyday consumption items such as food or fuel.

Speculators have no respect for common sense and the right price. They
are only concerned with the trend. It is possible for the speculative
demand to drive the price way above the common sense level, we saw
that when "peak oil" was a thing. But the price will eventually
gravitate towards the common sense price.

### Store of Value Price ###

In contrast, price for a store of value is purely speculative, which
means the sensibility of the price does not apply.

Let's take gold, for example. Intuitively we might reason that there
is a (non-speculative) supply and demand for gold, but it's actually
illusory.  The annual production of gold is minute compared to the
total gold above ground, which means there is essentially no
supply. There is also next to no demand, because gold cannot be
consumed. There is never less or more gold available in the world, its
quantity is fairly constant. Yet the price fluctuates. The only
explanation for this is speculation.

There is simply no such thing as the "right price" for store of
value. If I want to move a million dollars into gold, the price of
gold is of no consequence to me, be it a thousand or a million dollars
per ounce. So long as I know that it is stable, it is a good store of
value.

The good news here is that no price is too high (or too low) for
Bitcoin. 4K only seems high because a year ago it was 400. We tend to
judge the price based on history, and there is good sense in that,
indeed what goes up in value too much too fast often subsequently
_corrects_.

### Importance of Market Cap ###

_Market capitalization_ is the price of all of the asset available in
the world. It's easy to compute the market cap for a stock because we
know the number of shares outstanding. There is no such thing as a
market cap for a commodity because it is continuously produced and
consumed. When it comes to something like gold, we can estimate the
market cap because we know approximately how much physical gold is
above ground. Bitcoin, like gold, has an approximate market cap
(approximate because it is not possible to know how much BTC has been
lost).

Market cap size is critical for adoption of a store of value. It needs
to be large enough to "fit" even very large amounts of fiat, ideally
without affecting the market. Gold market cap is estimated at 7
trillion USD, which means that even the richest people can move all
their assets into gold and not move the market. (At least one at a
time. All of them at once will move the market big time).

Bitcoin market cap of about 70B USD is not large enough for even one
of the richest people on the planet. This implies that if the market
cap does not grow, Bitcoin is likely to fail as store of value.

### Hash Rate ###

What sets Bitcoin apart from all other crypto currencies is its
extremely high hash rate. This means that a Bitcoin is orders of
magnitude more "precious" than any other crypto coin presently in
existence.

There is a definite correlation between the Bitcoin hash rate and the
price. Some people argue that hash rate follows price, not the other
way around, and it's probably true.

Bitcoin's high hash rate is what makes it the best store of value
among crypto coins today.

### Adoption ###

Ultimately, I believe adoption is the most important factor in Bitcoin
USD price. Greater adoption will increase the number of speculators
willing to own Bitcoin, it will drive the price up, and hopefully
bring it to a level comparable to that of gold.

The key to adoption is not ease of payment or volume of transactions
like we used to think until very recently. The key to adoption is
understanding of the mathematics behind Bitcoin. With all the hype
surrounding it, only remarkably few understand how sound Bitcoin
actually is. In many ways it is more sound than any other store of
value known, including gold.

Regardless of whether Bitcoin becomes de facto digital gold or not, we
are witnessing a historic transformation possibly bigger than the
Internet itself.
