---
layout: post
title: "Bitcoin: Better Ink than Gold?"
date: 2017-09-22 07:52
comments: true
published: true
categories:
---

The fundamental question about Bitcoin is not whether it is sound from
the cryptography standpoint. The question is: what is it?

### Money is Debt Ink ###

To define Bitcoin we need to look back at the history of _money_.  The
earliest money was in the form of things that were scarce and
impossible to falsify, something like specific kinds of sea shells.
Everyone knew that stuff could be traded for these tokens.

Once such monetary tokens were invented, we no longer needed to decide
what to barter right there and then, we could postpone the
decision. One could _sell_ milk for tokens, then use those tokens to
_buy_ a spear later, this way the milk didn't spoil while waiting for
the spear to be made.

What is not very obvious is that the tokens represented _debt_.  A
sale is really a _loan_ in disguise. Before the sale, the seller had
milk. After the sale, the seller had tokens, which are proof that
value of tokens is owed to the seller. In other words, the tokens
received for the milk sold were a _record of debt_. Tokens are the
_ink_ in which this record is written.

It is noteworthy that there is no money if there is no debt, or that
money implies debt. It's a simple principle that so few understand.

### World-Wide Debt Ledger ###

The best way of thinking about money is that it is the _medium_ in
which we maintain a world-wide record of debt. The entries in this
book or ledger are written as physical tokens. Only the people in
possession of the tokens actually know how much they have and there is
no history, only the final state. The history exists only in the
minds (or records) of the traders. It is very private.

### Gold Ink ###

Later people started using rare metals such as gold or silver as
money.  Metals were better than sea shells because they were
divisible. We could now make arbitrary size tokes we called (coined?)
_coins_.

Although we intuitively think that gold has a lot of value, in reality
it has very little. Gold does not feed us or keep us warm. It does
have some unique properties, but back when we started using gold as
money we couldn't possibly appreciate those, other than perhaps gold
being pretty and extremely durable.

Gold is also rare. But rarity does not imply value. The sea shells
were worthless before they were used as money, and they are worthless
now, yet they too are rare.

### Banks, Paper  and Records of Records (of Records) ###

But it turned out that keeping valuable tokens was difficult, they
could be lost or stolen, and worse, people were willing to kill for
them. And so we decided to keep them all safe in one place.  This
was the original _bank_.

The bank issued _paper notes_ that corresponded to the gold in the
vault. Now these paper notes could be traded for anything. This was
because people knew that even though the paper is worthless, it
represents gold that is in the bank. At any time one could go to the
bank, give the bank the paper note and receive gold (at which point
the bank would destroy the paper note because the debt is settled).

A paper note is a _record of the record_ of debt. The true record was
in gold, paper was a copy. It's a bit of a mind-twister, but humans
have become really good at rewriting the original debt ledger in other
mediums.

Ironically the concept of the bank as a safe vault never really
worked: people were willing to steal and kill for paper money just the
same. These days bank vaults keep paper notes as if its gold. And the
bank's computer keeps a _record of the record of the record_ of debt.

### Real Estate Ink ###

At some point bankers realized that they can manipulate the monetary
supply because only the bankers actually knew how much gold they
had. It was done "for the good of the public" who could get easier
loans, but it was also an easy way for the banks to make money out of
nothing.

Eventually it was decreed that not just gold, but anyhting could be
similarly held by the bank so that vastly more paper notes could be
issued. Most notably real estate, the arrangement of issuing paper
notes for a house being known as a mortgage. And since a house cannot be
placed into the vault, it too had to be recorded, creating yet another
layer of abstraction. It all ended with collateralized debt
obligations, credit default swaps and ultimately the 2008 subprime
mortgage crisis. Next year Bitcoin was born...

### Monetary System is Just a Ledger ###

The bottom line remains: we kept a legder. The recording medium was
precious metals, then evolved to paper and metals, and finally when we
went off the gold standard it became just paper reflecting value of
arbitrary things held under lien as collateral.

### Enter Blockchain ###

The Bitcoin _blockchian_ is also a medium for this legder, only
instead of relying on scarcity of precious metals, the scarcity is in
the mathematical complexity of a problem.

And this is where our minds begin to play tricks on us, because this
is a concept previously unknown to humans. A Bitcoin, which takes an
enormous amount of computational power to generate, is actually,
really scarce. Yes, it is not physical, it is just "knowlegde" or
"information", but by all laws of nature it is scarce, in fact more
scarce than gold, the total amount of which in the universe isn't
fully known.

### But Bitcoin is just an Agreement? ###

Interestingly, Bitcoin is merely an agreement and one might argue that
some day we can collectively decide to increase the 21 million limit
thereby diluting Bitcoin value. But can we actually do that, or will it
not be Bitcoin at that point? I think only time will
tell.

We do already have a lot of things that we agree on and we don't
really question how it happened. The aforementioned shells were
collectively agreed upon. We agree on what the current date is, does
it matter how it happened? In fact, much of what the world is, just
_is_, including the fiat money (where "fiat" literally means "let it
be done"). And so now Bitcoin just is.

The sea shells ceased to exist as money in favor or precious metals,
and it is likely that same will at some point happen with Bitcoin.

History does show that when it comes to money, people show their worst
traits. This is why countries with solid currencies have big armies
and police, and very strict laws regarding manipulation of money. This
is how "fiat" actually works.

Amazingly, the mathematic principles on which Bitcoin is based do not
need to be defended. No army in the world could ever change a single
prime number.

### Alternative Realities ###

The name Bitcoin refers to a specific blockchain. There can be many
like it. The name could have been different, the parameters of the
algorithm could have been different, just like the dollar bills could
have been blue. There are other cryptographic currencies, and they are
different, they too now exist. (Caveat: some of them are
mathematically bogus).

One could argue that gold exists in nature, while Bitcoin was created
by man, and thus gold is somehow more real. But Bitcoin rests on the
mathematical principles that too are just part of this universe, they
were not created by man, they were discovered and applied, and again
in this sense Bitcoin isn't much different than gold.

### The Mystery of Value ###

The mystery to me is how we collectively set a value of things like
gold or Bitcoins. Now that we've demonstrated that as money, they are
equivalent. Why is an ounce of gold worth $1300? Who decided that? The
market? Is the real value of it in how good of an ink it is in the
world-wide debt ledger?

To be continued...
